

![The Blog Startup](https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/61Lm6P0rPsL._SL1360_.jpg?classes=inline&height=175px)

[The Blog Startup - By Meera Kothand](The_Blog_Startup.md)
Date Read: 2024-04-14. How Strongly I Recommend It: 8/10

Go to the [Amazon page](https://www.amazon.com/Blog-Startup-Strategies-Exponentially-Bucketloads/dp/1661494315/ref=sr_1_1?crid=3I1M4WOL8NYSO&dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.gF0lNhOVfTY2fdzJBT6nok8i4N8T5o5Fj6sn_sXzzchzgnjswI_1_Uqjs2NmxB-Xz3Dn9_pe2Ux_f3VrejzLD9ZP2idqOjR3Bg64MVkh8Q1lR0Qg5slEkJqBYZ9GaZCJa7bnT47aKm52_Il_nVV5T_w5cf8WDggqX5Oz4Ks9EJx-Ft3xClVQBD6cjQtW9r9rpheBZD7Ts880kgPBWq301JwHzLhxf1seXxdhJq7Vnzs.LxQPqBwwGIcwnu4BlBqH37IghuenH8dMLlqL8qUuxJk&dib_tag=se&keywords=the+blog+startup&qid=1713092862&sprefix=the+blog+startup%2Caps%2C144&sr=8-1) for details and reviews.

If you are wanting to blog as a business, you need a sound strategy and business model. Filled with practical tips on identifying your audience, email strategy, branding, marketing, things to watch out for, etc. Definitely read this if you are wanting to start a blog.


---

Have a business model. 

Have core core or brand that is responsible for attracting people to you.

Two approaches to a new blog: **content first or offer first**.

With **content first**, you start with no product or service and create content to attract, grow, and nurture your audience. Your blog serves as a content hub to get people in the door.

You get permission to be in touch with them via email.

You find out what type of content makes your audience tick

Once you start attracting an audience, you promote your own digital or affiliate products or offer the services that are most aligned with
their needs and your skill set or expertise.

In **Method 2**, you have existing products and

services and your blog serves to support your business

Even if you start with Method 1—like I did—you will eventually need to
transition to Method 2

You need to figure out

**•** The ypes of problems you want to solve for your audience.

Your **Business Model** (Your pathway to making money. Because if you
don’t monetize, you don’t

have a business.)

• Your **core or essence** (Your brand, which will be responsible for
attracting your ideal readers or buyers.)

**DOWNLOAD YOUR BONUS PACK AT** **HTTPS://THEBLOGSTARTUP.COM/BONUS**

some myths you may have heard about niches:

• If there are big, established blogs in a niche, stay away from it.

• If you don’t have enough experience and knowledge in the niche,
don’t even attempt it

Your niche has to be original.

If there are several blogs in a niche, that nicheemis/emcrowded.
But it also means that there is validation

of an existing audience out there for your blog…

That there is demand for the information, products, and services
related to that niche

That there are people who are actively looking to solve pain points or
need support in this niche

Those big blogs may take a chunk of your audience, but not everyone
will resonate with the voice and style of the big blogs. That’s the
reason several blogs are able to thrive alongside each other. Remember
that people are more likely to be influenced by someone they like and
can relate to—someone who’s at a level that seems

attainable. The pieemis/embig enough for all of us

**The basis of a good niche is four-fold:**

**1.** Your target audience’s pain points

**2.** Your strengths and interests

Think of your blog in terms of the **problem it solves.**

a niche is a solution to a problem

People want to be better versions of themselves. This better version
does not have to be about having *more* *money*. It could fall under

any one of the following areas:

• Personal development

• Fitness

• Food

• Budgeting or personal finance

• Fashion/Beauty

Lifestyle

– Home decor

– Organization

– Travel

– Outdoor/Survival

The missing puzzle pieces that people don’t consider before they pick
a niche are

**3.** Are there others in this niche who are

**a.** serving a similar audience (big or small) who have the same
problem or pain points that you

want to help solve

**b.** effectively monetizing their sites

Who is participating in the conversation in this niche? Make a list of
these people. Take note of their biz models: How are they monetizing
their blogs? If you see that people are paying to get rid

of pain or to gain something, then there’s certainly potential in that
niche. You’re looking for signs of money flows in the niche. This
could be via digital products, coaching, services, events, or even
physical products

Your niche does not target a one &amp; done

problem

Your niche needs to have recurring income potential. You don’t want to
solve a problem that people only seek help for once. You want a niche
where people have the opportunity to advance and fulfill their
potential at various stages. How can they solve pain points of various
intensities as

they progress

help your audience through

various tiny transformations

Out of all your ideas, which ones do you have a clear monetization
plan for

what

can see yourself working on for at least the next 3–5 years?

bring your topics under one overarching theme or topic. What is your
main message to your audience? What is the one thing you want them to
take away? What message combines your different topics?

Frugality? Purposeful or intentional living? Happiness? Minimalism?

Pick a message, keep it at the center, and then work out your value
proposition

when you try to explain five other things at the same time. Too many
messages get confusing.

Jot down ideas on what your niche could be and make sure it meets the
four-fold criteria

theblogstartup.com/workbook

core message of your blog. This will form the basis for every single
email, video, image, blog post, or product you create

Your content has to educate, entertain, inspire, teach, or help your
readers in some way

How can you come up with an all-encompassing purpose or value
proposition for your blog? You start by defining your blog parameters
and drilling down into them to get really specific

State your big business umbrella

• Drill down to the core business or niche.

• State your Niche Level 1 (For who); i.e., what group/location

Drill down to your Niche Level 2 (To do what); i.e., what problem you
want to help them with

educate/inspire/entertain/teach/help \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ who want to
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I show \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ how \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

**Psychographics**

• What frustrates them?

• What worries do they have?

• What websites do they visit?

What blogs do they read?

• What other hobbies or interests do they have?

• What social media channels do they hang out on?

• What mental block do they have to overcome?

• What is preventing your ideal reader from

achieving the desired change?

**Motivational Factors**

• What do they desire, want, and aspire to?

• What are their fears, frustrations, and challenges?

• What do they want to achieve in the next three

years?

define clearly **who I** ***do not***strongwant to serve./strong>

My ideal reader is unlikely to be…

• My ideal reader is unlikely to identify with the

term…

• My ideal reader is unlikely to be interested in

Research your ideal reader.

Create a persona based on that research

Join Facebook groups where your ideal audience members are likely to
hang out

Once you have access to a Facebook group, use the “Search this group”
box and type in the following keywords (including the quotation
marks):

need help”

• “desperate for”

• “newbie”

• “have no clue”

• “advice about”

• “question about”

Other places you can mine for information on your ideal reader are
Amazon, Udemy, and Product Hunt to name a few

Look at products within your niche. What reviews and comments do they
have? What are your audience saying

keep a swipe file of the exact ways your audience are describing their
pain points, you can use these very words on your home page, about
page, and landing pages to connect with them

YourstrongBRAND/strongisn’t the logo or color palette you
choose. Rather it’s the experience someone has with you

What experience do you want to create? That’s what should influence
your color palette. That’s what should influence your choice of font
or logo

You can’t build a personal brand if you try to be all things for all
people

The more you alienate people, the more you attract your own kind of
people too.

If you were a well-known blogger, who would you be?”

There should be one or two people who immediately come to mind

think of who in the online space you most

resonate with. What about them do you want to emulate for your brand?
What aspects of their brand do you want to incorporate for your own
blog and business? Do you know what you believe in? What you stand
for?

I want my target audience persona to feel that I’m \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
when they read my posts and watch/listen to my content (*e.g.,
motivating, approachable*).

Most people would describe me as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

*e.g., professional, confident, knowledgeable, fun*).

• My blog business believes in\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

• If I was a well-known blogger, I would be\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

• I would never want to be seen as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

would never want my content to be \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

• What feelings do I want my brand to evoke?

A solid brand creates trust, recognition, and consistency

The words, tone, and style you use in your writing say a lot about it.

You need to be consistent in the voice you project across different
content pieces and even platforms.

if you’re not careful, you can end up with

a random concoction of voices and tones.

People won\'t quite get what you\'re about

You\'ll start attracting different people *and* end up confusing your
target audience.

This is why you don’t ever want to leave defining your brand to
chance. You also don’t want to

sound like others in your niche

qualify what your brand isn’t. For instance, your brand is bold but
not arrogant. Fun but not wishy-washy

Honest

but not hurtful

Put these together using the ADDE (Attribute Markers – Dos – Don’ts –
Expressions) Formula. Do’s are a short description of what your
attribute markers actually mean. Don’ts define how you

don’t want your brand voice to come across. And the expressions drill
down into the tiny nuances of how your brand voice comes across.

add in special expressions that embellish your writing. How would you
talk to that

person? Is your brand funny, warm, girly, or quirky? Or is it
sophisticated, modern, and serious?

Something that’s right for someone else might not be right for you, so
know yourself well

When you write like everyone else and sound like everyone else and act
like everyone else, you’re saying, ‘Our products are like everyone
else’s, too.’ Or

Would you go to a dinner

party and just repeat what the person to the right of you is saying
all night long?

Always ask yourself, Does this sound and feel like you? Does this
represent your brand?

Make your own color palette at Adobe Color5 or explore predesigned
color palettes at Color Hunt6

Use the 60/30/10 rule for colors.

A primary color should take up 60% of the space. For contrast, 30% of
the space should be occupied by the secondary color. The remaining 10

should be used for the accent color.

Use a word association exercise like the one at Viget7

you select your brand colors. Then head to FontPair8 to pick a set of
complimentary fonts

use a maximum of 2–3 fonts on your site. You could use one font for
your headers, one font for your body of text, and an accent font which
you should use sparingly on your sidebar or

images

Google fonts are safe for free

and

commercial use.

You do not need a professionally designed logo

Get a simple font logo instead

3 MUST-ANSWER QUESTIONS BEFORE YOU PROCEED

WHAT WILL BE YOUR PRIMARY CONTENT CHANNEL—THE MEDIUM YOU USE TO BUILD
TRUST AND GROW YOUR AUDIENCE?

blog to be your primary content channel

pick one when you’re starting out because you don’t want to spread
yourself too thin.

pick ONE main traffic source (likely a social media platform) and one
secondary traffic source

primary traffic source is the one that helps you with lead

generation. It brings traffic to your site, and if your site is
optimized well (which we’ll talk about in just bit)

it’ll help you convert traffic to subscribers and grow your email
list, i.e., your audience

examples of traffic sources

Pinterest

YouTube

• Instagram

• LinkedIn

• Borrowing others’ platforms (i.e., guest posting)

• Influencers

pick one that’s aligned with your ideal audience.

**INSTAGRAM**
• Best place to reach teens and millennials. 59% of 18–29-year-olds
use Instagram.

**FACEBOOK**
• Works in largely any market. 84% of 30–49-year-olds use Facebook.

• But Facebook is clamping down heavily on diet, weight loss, etc.
Check if your market

is approved by their ToS

**PINTEREST**
• Marketing primarily to women, focusing on physical products. 45% of
women online vs. 17% of men online.

**YOUTUBE**
• Involve keyword targeting. Reach predominantly male audience.

• 55% of men online vs. 44% of women online.

**TWITTER**
• Younger market. More techy.

**LINKEDIN**
• 45% $75K+annual income.

Your secondary traffic source is one that feeds your primary traffic
source or your marketing goals

Guest posting was a huge part of my strategy to grow my audience when
I started out

connect with influencers by sharing their work.

engaged with them on Twitter so that I could get on their radar and
get them familiar with my name before I pitched them a post

If you’re stretched too thin, forego the secondary

source of traffic altogether and just focus on your primary traffic
source.

HOW WILL YOU BUILD AUTHORITY AND CREDIBILITY?

Can you get featured on podcasts and guest posts?

Can you coach or help people in exchange for a testimonial?

How can you work on displaying more authority markers such as “as seen
in” logos?

did a ton of free site reviews and email sequence reviews for my
readers when I started out

did guest

posting as I mentioned earlier so that I could display “as seen in”
logos on my site to build credibility and authority

book *But I’m Not an Expert!*

your ONE constant will be an email list.

You don’t own anything other than your email list. Your blog is a
transient medium

Email is the only thing that gives you this undivided attention.

You think you need it only after building an audience but without it,
it’s hard to nurture an audience as well. And even if you have a
product ready for sale now, you wouldn’t be able

to sell it because you don’t have a pool of subscribers to sell it to.

Your primary content channel is to attract an audience, build trust,
and entice them to sign up for your email

list

What separates you from everyone else?

How is your content different? How is your business going to be
different?

You don’t want to fit in. When you blend in too much with everyone
else in your niche, you make it hard for readers to choose you.

this “the hook”—a simple pivot or deviation from something familiar
meant to get your audience’s

attention.

book *The One Hour Content Plan*

think about why someone should read your blog over the thousands of
others on a similar subject matter?

six

ways to differentiate your business. Have a look at the diagram below.

saying it in a way that nobody else has before via your brand voice,
style, or presentation

Are you able to solve

your audience’s pain point in a better way than anyone else?

Everything you do is centered around helping your audience tackle one
specific challenge

giving your audience access to you is seen as a bad thing. But this is
how you can

distinguish yourself

Good service is a point of parity; it’s what you’re expected to have.
So if this is your differentiator, your service has to be truly
exceptional

Every brand has a spot in the marketplace. While low price does not
necessarily equate to low quality, especially when you target the
right audience, you don’t want to pick this as a differentiator.
Because this often leads to a race

the bottom

Once you pick a point of differentiation, ask yourself the following:

**Is it relevant to your readers?**

What words do they use to describe your content and doing business
with you? Is this aligned with how you want to differentiate yourself?
Is that differentiation evident to your readers?

Your differentiation strategy may need to change with time so always
analyze the space and see that your differentiation strategy still
holds true.

**Don’t fall for the most popular or**

promoted tool or service

**Free or cheapest is not always the best**

what you can expect to pay for in the early

A premium mobile-optimized theme

• Good hosting

• An email service provider

• Lead capture tools (landing pages &amp; opt-in forms)

As you charge more for your products, you may want to create a better
experience for your students

As you start to attract more people, maybe you want to outsource
design rather than do it yourself.

Can I make back this investment? Does this investment allow me to save
time to (a) serve my audience better and (b) engage in
business-building activities that would allow me to increase my
income?

Think of your content in terms of buckets. Each content category is a
bucket and you can have 3–5 content buckets.

think about the content your target persona wants and needs. What does
she want to know from you? What subjects do you have enough knowledge
or experience in, that matter to her?

**If I wanted to be known for just three topics, what would those
be?”**

Your readers start to get a clear picture of what you are about and
who you serve.

• You’re seen as “an expert” or knowledgeable in a few topics rather
than anything and everything.

It’s easier to work with brands because they’ll look at your main
topics to see if they fit with their products.

• It’s easier to secure clients

These will shift over time

it’s easier to establish authority in 1–3 topics

bank or vault to capture ideas in.

where exactly are you going to get ideas from?

LOOK AT YOUR OWN NICHE AND COMPETITION

What articles have done well for them in terms of shares and comments?

How can you replicate this success?

Sign up for content curation sites. These are

sites like

\- ContentGems

\- Scoop.it

\- BuzzSumo

These sites will send you lists of articles on topics you have
selected in your notification

settings. These sources will give you the fuel to ensure your content
bank is always filled.

Only attempt to replicate those topics if there is a gap that you can
fill.

There are three characteristics of content that are deemed valuable

Fills an opportunity gap

Could your content be better? Will your piece make a contribution to
the existing content on this topic? Could you make it more helpful or

user-friendly with tutorials or videos? Can it go further in-depth?

**2. Has a clearly identifiable point of view**

Is there a viewpoint or angle that hasn’t been addressed in the
existing content out there?

Does your content take a stance about the topics and

problems in your niche that others have not? Could your personality or
brand voice give it a different slant?

**3. Breaks sacred cows**

Are there**** myths and beliefs that are immune from criticism or
question? Does your content prove

these wrong?

**METHOD 2: DO MORE OF WHAT’S WORKING FOR YOU**

Make sure you have Google Analytics installed for this step.

If you don’t have Google Analytics yet, get the free plug-in Google
Analytics Dashboard for WP. This plug-in automatically adds the
tracking code to all the pages on your site.

Then go to Google Analytics and sign up for a free account.

**Look at your Google Analytics account to find your**

strong/strong>

**• Top Posts**

Go to Behavior &gt; Site Content &gt; All Pages.

Look at your top ten posts.

**• Bounce rate**

Go to Behavior &gt; Site Content &gt; Landing Pages.

Look for posts with a low bounce rate. Your readers are staying on
these posts for a longer period of time.

**Look at your Pinterest Analytics**

Click on Analytics &gt; Overview &gt; Top Pins &gt; Links

clicks. Identify the posts with the higher click-through rates.

**METHOD 3: CREATE CONTENT FOR ALL LEVELS OF YOUR READERS**

Everyone who comes to your site is at a different place in the
journey.

Some may be aware of the problem your service or product solves. Some
be actively shopping for a solution. Others may be at the very
beginning and have no idea that they even have a problem to

solve in the first place.

Depending on the stage your reader is at, they require different
pieces of content to move them from one stage to another.

To effectively move your readers from one stage to another, answer the
following question:

What keeps my audience stuck in this phase and what do they need from
me and my content to move forward?

Create different pieces of content to fuel the

reader journey

books *The One Hour Content Plan* and *The Profitable Content System*.

Yoast defines cornerstone content as the core of

your website. “It consists of the best, most important articles on
your site; the pages or posts you want to rank highest in the search
engines.”14

ideal topic for a cornerstone content piece is something that people
are commonly searching for, without

getting satisfying results.”15

The content pieces that you want to tackle are those that

• Raise your brand awareness

• Establish authority and trust

• Feed your funnel (helping you build an email list

for example)

Minimum Viable Content Plan (MVCP)**.** These

Two how-to or list posts on a pressing question the competition has
failed to address.  
**(Authority post showcasing your expertise**

One polarizing or opinion post; e.g., X things you should never
believe about…Why this is flawed

What they don’t ever tell you about…  
**(Authority post showcasing your expertise)**

**Note:** This post can quickly come across as a rant if you don’t
have the credibility or authority to show for it yet. That doesn’t
mean you have to shy away from writing opinionated posts

just means that you need to show examples and substantiate your
content with third-party sources such as reputable articles and quotes
from authoritative sources.

**HOW TO OUTLINE YOUR POSTS**

**1. DETERMINE THE PURPOSE OF THE POST**

Always determine how each piece of content is going to fit into your
entire blog and business. Ask yourself what’s the goal of the post.

What do you want each post to do?

When you write with the end in mind, you know what you want the post
to do for you. You measure what that post is meant to do based on the
tangible and intangible goals you set beforehand.

**A tangible goal**

• Drive opt-ins to gauge interest for a product.

• Get opt-ins and then lead them down a sequence to a paid product.

• Make an affiliate commission.

• Pitch a sponsored post.

Educate your reader (how-tos

**An intangible goal**

• Position yourself as an expert or thought leader.

• Network with influencers (through a roundup post).

• Empower your readers (e.g., motivational

pieces, income reports).

• Entertain with personal stories.

The goal of your content needs to center on action.

IDENTIFY THE MAIN PAIN POINT

Pain always triumphs benefit. So always lead with the pain your
audience is facing.

What **pain point** are you hitting at in the post? Knowing this will
help you with writing the introduction and conclusion of your posts.
It will also make it easy for your audience to identify

with and relate to your post

at least once a week or once every two weeks.

grow your email list while your blog

is still a work in progress. This is what I refer to as **Minimum
Viable Email Marketing (MVEM)**.

Your MVEM consists of the following:

• One opt-in incentive or lead magnet

• One landing page for your main opt-in incentive

or lead magnet

• Opt-in forms on three top posts   
Check your Google Analytics to find out what these are. Head to
Behavior &gt; Site Content &gt; All Pages.

One thank you page where you will direct new

subscribers to click confirm that they do indeed want to subscribe to
get your opt-in incentive

One top bar/exit intent pop-up/slide-in to capture traffic

• One welcome email that covers the 3Cs

\- Credibility

Who are you? Why should they trust you or listen to you? What logos,
features, special life incidents, beliefs, or viewpoints will build up
your credibility?

\- Context

Why is what you’re talking about important

now?

\- Continuity  
How can you create an open loop that keeps them looking forward to
your next email? The postscript or P.S. is the best place to tease
your next email in your nurture series or nurture

funnel.

• Three emails in your nurture funnel  
One myth or mistake email

The easiest way to get someone to trust you is to break a widely held
myth or share something that gives them an “aha” or light

bulb moment.

\- What breaks your heart or makes you cringe in your industry/niche?

What do your ideal readers believe that they shouldn’t?

\- What’s the biggest excuse they make?

\- Identify the sacred cows and then break them.

One quick win/hack email

\- Answer a question that your ideal reader has or a question widely
asked in your niche. Offer a quick hack; e.g., How to grow my email
list, How to find my niche, How to set up

WordPress, etc.

One email about your struggle

Let’s discuss the elements in the MVEM in this chapter.

I picked ConvertKit vs. Mailchimp21

pick a provider that’s not only within your budget but one that’s able
to grow with your business and that has features and tools to deliver
what you have in mind for your business plans.

The easiest way to grow your email list is to offer an opt-in
incentive or lead magnet

examples

Swipe files

• Tool kits

• How-to guides

• Exclusive access to membership/Facebook groups

• Test/Quiz/Assessment

Webinar (prerecorded or live)

• Cheat sheets

• Bite-sized email series

• Free assessment

• Free consult

• Coupons

Loyalty program

Think of your blog purpose statement as well as the content categories
you have decided on. What incentive addresses a pain point of your
audience and is closely aligned with the purpose of your

blog?

opt-in incentive has to act as a primer for a related product or
service that you have to offer.

think about the problems that you want to solve for your audience.
What do you

want to inspire, help, or educate them about?

In what categories and areas do you see yourself creating products or
services

best opt-in incentives are quick to consume. They provide instant
gratification and your

audience should be able to immediately identify with the pain point
that the incentive helps solve. You

do not need to create a massive guide to get subscribers.

PROMOTE YOUR OPT-IN INCENTIVE

If you’re going on a podcast or are guest posting, share a link to a
landing page

Always write descriptions for your opt-in incentives and share them
where appropriate

how to construct an attractive description

Write from the perspective of the reader in a conversational tone.

Have a call to action.

Use one of these starters:

\- Have you ever been in a situation…?

\- Imagine…

\- Are you struggling with…?

\- Ever wonder how…?

\- Do you ask yourself…?

\- Did you ever notice that…?

Insert starter and pain point.

2\. In this \[what’s your opt-in?\], I share \[what’s in your
freebie\].

3\. With \[state the name of your opt-in\], you’ll \[state the
benefits\]. Get it here!

4\. Insert LINK.

http://meerakothand.com/send-email-list/

PREPARE YOUR SITE TO CAPTURE TRAFFIC

Don’t be afraid of placing too many opt-in forms on your site. People
are so used to seeing opt-in forms that they skim right past them

If they’ve scrolled to the end of a post and enjoyed it and they don’t
see an opt-in form there, most people are unlikely to take the trouble
to scroll up to find one.

Add opt-in forms to your most popular posts and

one top bar or exit intent pop-up to grab their attention.

HOW TO CRAFT YOUR OPT-IN FORMS AND LANDING PAGES

determine what change your opt-in incentive gives your subscriber.

Less organized to more organized

• Anxious to calm and happy

• Struggling to get traffic to plentiful page views and subscribers

Then use the following formula on your opt-in form:

**“YES! SEND ME \[NAME OF OPT-IN\] SO THAT**

BENEFIT\].” OR “\[PROBLEM?\] Get my \[SOLUTION\] and \[RESULT\].

Then list down everything that your opt-in covers in bullet points.

here are a few ways you can present your bullet points:

■ Add intrigue by hinting at a secret or a myth

■ Give a warning.

■ Add an “even if” statement.

■ Specify a branded technique.

Another way to capture traffic is via a landing page. And the
conversion rate of a landing page is a lot higher than that of an
opt-in form.

formula

landing page

PROBLEM?\] Get my \[SOLUTION\] and

RESULT\].”

**WRITE YOUR** **WELCOME EMAIL + WELCOME EMAIL SERIES**

forty-eight hours after a subscriber opts-in is when they are most
engaged with your brand?

have a look at the open rates for your welcome email.

opportunity to make a great first impression and start cultivating a
relationship with your subscribers on the right note.

what your welcome email should address:

Deliver your opt-in incentive.

Share some social proof in the form of testimonials or links to places
you’ve been featured.

• State why are you the best person to inspire, educate, or teach your
subscriber about the

topic and why the topic is important.

• Open a conversation loop. Ask them a specific question that will
enable you to peek directly into what your subscriber needs.

series of 3–5 emails in a welcome email series on top of your single
welcome email.

Each email builds off the other to help reinforce your brand and get
them acquainted with your best content, what you have to offer, and
why

you’re the best person to help them.

You can set these emails in a sequence to go out on auto whenever a
person signs up to your list.

masterclass here: https://meera.email/gold

home page

recommend focusing on the first **one-third** of your screen

having an image or hero shot in that space with a statement that calls
out your audience and states how you help them.

People need to land on your site and know within five seconds if your
site’s for them.

having a call to action or

invitation to subscribe embedded within the header or right below the
header as well social proof indicators.

Social proof indicators can be one of the following:

• Testimonials

• Press mentions or “as seen in” logos

Customer stories

• Awards and accolades

• Numbers (satisfied customers, rankings, subscribers, followers,
etc.)

• Reviews and ratings

have this header featured prominently in the top one-third of every
page on your site.

other elements

Call to action

Before you craft your home page, think about all the people likely to
visit your site. What problems are they trying to solve and what are
the different needs these visitors will have? What offers or
incentives (paid or free) would you want to feature?

home page can feature a prominent call to action

can also have additional buttons and links that are useful to your
reader and present your body of work

When in doubt, remember that your aim should be to get people onto
your email list

rather than feature all your products and services, let the focus be
on getting someone onto your email list

from there you can carve out a pathway (i.e., sequence of emails) to
get their eyeballs on your products and services.

Less is more when it comes to your site menu or navigation

When your site’s new, you do not need to feature your blog categories.
An overloaded menu will clutter your site and cause confusion for your
site visitors

suggested navigation menu

Start here/About me

Contact

• Work with me

• Shop

• Resources

• Link to main content channel (i.e., podcast, blog, YouTube channel)

**Hero shot / Your first one-third**

o Hook/Headline addressing their pain point and struggle

o How you can help them

o Why they should trust you

An image of you aligned with your brand attributes

A fabulous about page

creates trust

• establishes your credibility

• builds rapport

• injects your personality

most stellar about pages have five or more of the seven elements below

Use YOU and WE instead of I

you should make your reader or customer the focus of your about page

Write as if you’re talking to a friend and acknowledging his/her
worries

Tell them what you help with

What is your website about? Who is it for and how does it help them?

The simple plug-and-play exercise below can help you be clear about
who you are serving.

div markdown="1">
I help\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (parents/small business

/div>

owners/women/photographers) to\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (explain the
benefit they’ll get through your website).

This blog/website is for\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (your target audience).

am a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (entrepreneur/writer/blogger/freelancer).

This blog/website is for\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (your target audience).

You may be afraid of alienating certain groups of people, but your
blog or business is not for everyone.

And that’s how it should be.

You’d rather attract one hundred raving fans who get what your brand
and message is about than

one thousand people who lurk around and show no engagement

**Show them you understand their pain points**

What’s troubling them?

What are their motivations or aspirations?

By doing this, you’re establishing trust, and you’re telling your
reader that you understand them.

examples.

*Have you ever said*

*- I wish I could quit, but I need to pay the bills.*

*- I need more time for myself, but I have so much to do.*

*- I want a support group that doesn’t judge me.*

*Are you*

Dreading the thought of another meeting? /

*- Dreaming of the weekend every single workday? Tired of the long
hours with little appreciation?*

Create connection with THE story

Your readers want to buy into ***YOUR*** **story**.

Maybe you’re a few steps ahead of your readers.

Maybe you’re several steps ahead. They want to know that they can get
there—to the place where you’re already at.

You want them to think: *If she can do it. I think I can.*

You’re selling them your story and the possibility of a journey.

The same works if you’re a business

What meaning does your business or product convey? What story are they
buying into with your product?

Dig into your *why*

Find a core message that ties your products together and create a
story around your struggle.

Give them a reason to listen to you

the little white space—your mini wall of fame where you list your
achievements and establish credibility.

Where has your work been featured?

o How many companies have you worked with?

o How many websites have you designed?

How many years of experience do you have in the industry?

Be upfront and position yourself as someone who is experiencing the
same struggles and looking for a change.

Let them know what to expect

What kind of topics are you writing about?

o Do you have a posting schedule?

o When can they expect to hear from you?

Include ONE call to action

What’s the purpose of your about page?

Is it to get them to look at your store?

If you’re a blogger, is it to get them to sign up for your updates or
newsletter?

If you’re running a consulting business or if you’re a coach, is it to
get them to set up an appointment with you?

THANK YOU PAGE

Subscribers are most engaged when they first sign up for your list

Here are some elements you can include to make your thank you page
work harder for you:

• A picture of you

• Clear instructions on what they should do next

• Your social media links

A request to share your site or freebie

• Links to your best content

• Testimonials from your readers

• A personality (the most important thing!)

What goals are important to you?

\- Adding credibility?

\- Increasing your following on Instagram?

Promoting your opt-in freebie or lead magnet?

add 2–3 elements at most on your thank you page

LAUNCH PLAN A

You launch with a landing page, an opt-in incentive, a thank you page,
and a welcome email series/nurture sequence.

Use social media posts to build hype surrounding your launch and your
opt-in incentive

what you need to start with Plan A:

One main traffic source

• One landing page

• One opt-in incentive

• A Welcome email

• At least three emails in a welcome email series

• A thank you page for subscribers

• A snippet/description of your opt-in incentive to

promote on your chosen traffic source

LAUNCH PLAN B

Three pages

\- An about me page

\- A contact me page using a free plug-in

\- Home page

Three posts from your Minimum Viable Content Plan. Refer back to
chapter 9 for this

Your Minimum Viable Email Marketing Plan. Refer back to chapter 10 for
this

Done is better than perfect

spend the time creating posts or content for other sites via guest
posting or podcasts so that your brand builds credibility and
authority

But how do you monetize your blog? What will make it a business?

blanket statements like “A membership site is for everyone” or
“There’s a course in everyone” are dangerous statements.

Why?

first, they don’t consider your zone of

genius. Second, they don’t consider the stage of growth your business
is in.

Play to your strengths and do more of what\'s working for you even if
that may not seem like the fastest way of growing your business

when you operate in your zone of genius, you attract your ideal
customers. You serve them better and start to get known for the work
you do.

table below outlines different revenue streams you can incorporate
into your business

your first product does not, and dare I say should not, be a premium
course, especially if you’re new to marketing and selling, and if
you’ve just started to grow your audience

You can and *should* add a digital product. But start with a small
digital product

underestimated the time and resources that go into creating a
modulated course

A lower-priced item that would give

people a smaller win

you’ll feel more confident when you get a small product out fast

Your first goal should be to give your audience a taste of your paid
content

once they get a taste and they enjoy it, the chance of them coming
back to buy more increases

**Your first milestone should be to hit that $1K**

You will hit your $1K faster if you have an email list from Day 1 and
you take efforts to nurture that list.

THE 2M+1 SYSTEM TO BUILD YOUR BUSINESS MODEL

based on having two main

sources of blog income and one supplementary source rather than just
relying on one income stream.

example

One tripwire

One small product

• Affiliate marketing

Now my model looks like this:

• Self-publishing

• Membership site

Premium course

• Tripwires

• Affiliate marketing

As your business grows, you can diversify your income streams further.

The quickest way to monetize your blog is

to offer a service

if you love working with people one-on-one.

highly recommend creating a small product or tripwire

book *Your First*

100

A tripwire is a small-ticket item that you offer your subscriber as
soon as they subscribe or early on in your email sequence

The idea isn’t to profit from that product but to quickly turn a
subscriber into a buyer

Because people are more likely to

open their wallets and purses for you a second time if they’ve already
crossed that first sale hurdle

CREATING A SMALL PRODUCT OR TRIPWIRE

In the 90-day task list that you’ll find in your bonus PDF, I’ve
suggested preparing for your first small digital product at the end of
3–6 months

two signs that you are

indeed ready to create a small product or tripwire.

• You’re bringing in a consistent number of subscribers every day (no
matter what this number is).

You’re getting engagement from your subscribers via your welcome email

series/nurture sequence (this is a sign that your audience are
resonating with your content).

Here

are different product types that are valuable and that people will pay
for:

• Templates

Printables

• Spreadsheets

• E-books

• Masterclasses

• Workbooks

• Minicourses (with 2–3 videos

Live workshops

• Mock-ups

• Tools/System guides

Clues to what your first product should be:

**1.** Is there an opt-in incentive that’s converting

well for you?

If yes, create an accompanying product to that opt-in incentive. Have
a look at this diagram.

Your first product has to sit right after the opt-in that you created.
All email content that you’re creating should nudge the people who
opted in toward that product or service.

Are you known for a particular topic or do people come to you asking
questions about a

particular topic?

Is there a certain category of posts that gets you the most amount of
traffic?

Go back to the earlier question I asked: what do you want to be known
for?

Do you want to be a part of the conversation in a particular space?

Before you create a single worksheet or slide deck for your product,
do some validation.

You need to find out if there is a need for this product in the market
or in your niche.

One question I always get is…

*should I run surveys and ask my audience what they want?*

Do your audience really know what they want?

No, they don’t.

This is why I don’t recommend running surveys

One of Henry Ford’s famous quotes was “If I had asked people what they
wanted, they would have said faster horses.”

Instead of forcing your audience to discuss solutions that they don’t
yet appreciate or fully

recognize, get them to discuss problems or symptoms they have

how then can you test the viability of a product? How do you know if
this is something people will buy

Look at the market. A market consists of a group of products with
similar characteristics

Scan the market for the existence of other similar offers. This shows
you that there\'s a need—that people are looking for ways to solve
this problem

How searched for is the problem that your offer solves?

tool I’m loving right now is Keywords Everywhere

Are there popular articles on BuzzSumo?

Are there existing courses on Udemy or courses

created by other players in your niche?

a few things to look out for when you’re doing your market research:

• Hook

Look for the hook that other product creators

have used

Your hook is the promise of the product. In many cases, the hook is a
mixture of promise + timeline.

*What* exactly are they helping students achieve and *how* do they
promise to help them achieve that?

Testimonials

– What are students saying? You want to look for gaps in the market
for what people want and have not received and how you can fill in
with your product.

• Benefits

Features

• Bonuses

• Results

• Price point

if *you* can’t answer why someone

should buy your product over someone else’s, then no one can.

Once you have certain ideas for the type of product you want to create
and you’ve validated them, write targeted blog posts that show your
expertise on the topic. You want your readers to

associate you with the topic of the product

establish your authority and expertise in it so that readers trust
your views and teachings with regard to that topic.

Don’t wait to monetize your site

if you’re spending more time than you’re comfortable with, if you’re
expending more energy than is worth what you’re getting back, that’s a
revenue stream you should consider getting rid of.

Marketing isn’t just about selling or promotion. It’s also about
attracting and capturing your ideal customers.

marketing is made up of these four

activities: Attract – Capture – Engage – Convert

six parts:

• Identify your target audience.

• Attract them to your site.

• Capture your target audience.

Nurture that target audience.

• Convert them to buyers.

• Turn them into brand advocates or repeat customers.

When there are gaps in your marketing system

gaps in any one of these six areas—your business

will often experience feast and famine cycles

Have a look at the table below

**Stranger** They haven’t heard of you before at all. They probably
clicked onto your site from seeing a pin image on Pinterest, a
Facebook post that a friend of theirs shared, or a

tweet on their Twitter feed.

Reader

They have some form of brand recognition. They’ve heard of you before
via a podcast or have seen your guest post on a site they frequent. A
friend of theirs has

been raving about you. They’ve clicked through to your site to read
your content

Subscriber

They are new to your list. They visit your site likely from a link in
your welcome email series. They

may have read something intriguing in your email sequence and wanted
to have a look at your blog, YouTube channel, or other content
platforms

Engaged

subscriber

Heard of a brand crush? That’s

what these people have on you. They adore your style. Most of them
cannot wait to get their hands on your paid products if they haven’t
already

Customer

&amp; brand advocate

These are people who are

attuned to your style. They’ve likely bought from you before—possibly
more than once

Your business needs to make an effort to

1\. Get more people on the front end. This is how you continuously fill
your sales pipeline with leads or potential customers. You do this by
having a system where you attract people to your site with your
content

You ensure your site is optimized, and you have relevant opt-in forms
and landing

pages especially at the “hot spots” your audience frequent.

2\. Nurture new subscribers so that they become engaged subscribers and
customers

to the next

with your content. The further down people are, the better it is for
your business.

focus on what you need for your current stage of growth.

these rules guide you

**Will it make a direct impact on your business for your current stage
of growth?** **Will this move the needle for your blog +
business**strongright now//strong>**?**

Is there a particular skill you need to acquire to move forward?

Will you get back your ROI?

Is there a deal or special discount?

LIST OF THINGS YOU SHOULD NOT WORRY ABOUT IN THE FIRST 6 MONTHS

Creating a tag line

• Repurposing your content

• Getting a branded photoshoot

• Printing business cards (especially if you don’t have a local
physical presence)

Purchasing a designer logo (a simple font-based logo will do)

• Segmenting your email list

• Doing video

Purchasing expensive tech and tools

#### **LIST OF THINGS YOU SHOULD NOT DO**

**ASK FOR COMMENTS OR FEEDBACK ON YOUR OPT-IN INCENTIVE OR LOGO OR**

PRODUCT IDEA IN RANDOM FACEBOOK GROUPS.

Mine for what your audience is looking for. What are they saying? What
are their thoughts and pain points?

BRANCH OUT TO MULTIPLE PLATFORMS WITHIN THE FIRST YEAR

But be very clear on the goals you have for that platform. Why are you
on a platform? What’s your main goal? Ad revenue? Subscribers? Reach

Brand awareness?

COMPARE YOUR START TO SOMEONE ELSE’S MIDDLE

HOW TO 10× YOUR PRODUCTIVITY

BATCH

When you mix too many *different* types of tasks per day, you’re not
productive.

I talk about this more in *The Profitable Content System*. Or

PICK A FEW GOALS

Pick 1–3 goals a quarter depending on how ambitious you are.

Here are some blogging goals:

• Build authority and credibility.

• Connect with influencers.

• Nurture and build trust with subscribers.

• Increase page views.

here’s what you *can* influence:

• Create a specific lead magnet aligned with each post you write.

• Pitch one site a week to guest post on.

• Focus on building one social media platform where your target
audience hangs out.

Run a paid ad campaign

By focusing on actions you can directly influence, you won’t be tied
down to metrics or statistics. You will also work toward tasks that
you can directly impact

ENGAGE IN SPRINTS

concentrate on only one activity over a short period of time

things that benefit from the sprint technique:

• Creating a lead magnet or e-book

• Working on a short email course

Crafting your launch marketing emails

• Writing a guest post and submitting a pitch

AVOID DECISION FATIGUE

You only have a couple of hours and you don’t want to spend that time
debating *what* to do.

There are only two types of tasks you can do:

• Tasks that grow your blog

• Tasks that maintain your blog

Blog growth tasks are

Creating content

• Research for product creation

• Creating products

• Writing blog posts

• Engaging with your audience

• Networking with influencers

Marketing

**Maintenance tasks are**

• Website and theme updates

• Website and visual design

• Social media scheduling

Bookkeeping

• Brand audit

You do one task from one category each day

CREATE AN EDITORIAL CALENDAR AS SOON AS POSSIBLE

**ome ideas to plan your content**

• Have themed Months. Take your readers

through a topic for the entire month

Lock in launch dates, affiliate sales, events, and holidays that are
relevant to your niche. Work your content around these crucial dates

I designed and use the *CREATE Blog &amp; Editorial Planner*. You can
have a look at it here &gt;
https://www.createplanner.com/editorial-planner/.

When you feel overwhelmed, ask yourself

What do you need to do *right now* to make progress?

Consume content that’s aligned only with this

understand the type of selling you’re comfortable with and feel good
about. What type of selling will you not engage in? What line
won’t/emyou cross no matter what?

once you’re aware of this, you won’t have to second-guess yourself
every time you get a

nasty email

Any product you

create needs a few iterations before you get the messaging correct. So
don\'t shelve anything without giving it a chance to work for you

Foundation vs. speed. You need the right balance

I define a solid foundation as

**a.** Having systems in place to capture traffic and turn them into
subscribers

**b.** Having a system to nurture subscribers and convert them to
buyers

**c.** Having an idea of what the different content

platforms (email/blogging/vlogging) mean for you and how they are
distinct from one another

Authority is your audience knowing they can trust you.

If you read the same ole blogs that your target audience are reading,
how will you make new connections to the content out there? How will
you enrich your audience with a different

perspective?

find new sources to read. Find those that are out of your target
audience’s content circle

Then form new content connections that you can share with your
audience. Break existing beliefs and myths (or sacred cows as they
call it) and bring

them to light. That\'s the quickest way to build authority and trust.

Always reflect back on whether your vision still serves you

Is the vision you have what you want or what people say it should be

Is your business at odds with your vision for your life?


